Blog post: cocotb 1.6 (#51)
fossi-foundation/fossi-foundation.github.io: _posts/2021-10-20-cocotb-1-6-0.md

Read on for some of the highlights in this release.

## New ways to schedule coroutines

Coroutines are at the heart of cocotb -- it's even in our name!
Since early on coroutines could be scheduled to run concurrently with `cocotb.fork()`.
*That still works* -- but now there's a better way as well, and we encourage you to update your code.

In cocotb 1.6, we're introducing a new way of scheduling coroutines using `cocotb.start_soon()`.
Additionally, we're introducing two less commonly used functions, `await cocotb.start()`, and `cocotb.create_task()`.

Before we go into the details, the quick porting advice is:
**In most cases, you can simply replace `cocotb.fork()` with `cocotb.start_soon()`.**

### Coroutine basics

To understand the differences between the various ways of scheduling a coroutine we need to first recap the basics behind them.
A *coroutine function*, in cocotb, is a Python function declared with `async def`.
Coroutines *can* be executed in parallel -- in theory.
In practice, there's only one coroutine running at any given time.
So we need to choose which one gets to execute.

> Two potential solutions come to mind: we could, option one, introduce a "moderator" which allows, for example, a first task to execute for a bit, and then let's a second one execute, and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two potential solutions come to mind: we could, option one, introduce a "moderator" which allows, for example, a first task to execute for a bit, and then lets a second one execute, and so on.
```

In cocotb, you use the `await` statement to *yield* control, that is, give up control and indicate that another coroutine may now execute.
The execution resumes in the line after the `await` statement once the event specified after `await` has happened.

### Schedule a coroutine using cocotb.start_soon()

<img src="/assets/posts/2021-10-20-cocotb-1-6-0/scheduling_start_soon.png" style="max-width:100%" />

That's a lot of introduction: let's get back to `cocotb.fork()`, `cocotb.start_soon()`, and `await cocotb.start()`.
What's common to all these three functions is that they *schedule* a coroutine, which only means: these functions let cocotb know that a coroutine exists, and that it would like to run at some point.
The cocotb scheduler will then take care of the rest.

What distinguishes the three functions is what they do in addition to scheduling the given coroutine.

For `cocotb.start_soon()` the answer is easy: nothing.
A coroutine is only introduced to the scheduler, which will hand over control to it as soon as another coroutine gives up control.

Let's have a look at the figure above to understand how the scheduling could look.

> Let's assume `coro3()` has been scheduled earlier and is ready to execute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assume `coro3()` has been scheduled earlier and is ready to execute.
```
2x "Let's" close by.

In almost all cases you won't need the immediate trigger that `await cocotb.start()` provides, and you can use `cocotb.start_soon()` instead.

### The old way: cocotb.fork()

<img src="/assets/posts/2021-10-20-cocotb-1-6-0/scheduling_fork.png" style="max-width:100%" />

Finally, there's the third and "old" way of scheduling a coroutine: `cocotb.fork()`.
`cocotb.fork()` schedules the coroutine, executes *only this* coroutine until the next `await` statement, and then returns to the caller.
In the figure above, `coro1()` forks off `coro2()`, which then executes until the next `await` statement.
Then execution returns to `coro1()` and it executes until it yields control in an `await` statement.
Only then can all other coroutines, e.g. `coro3()` do their work.

We deprecated `cocotb.fork()` because it has slightly odd behavior (by today's standards, of course):
* `cocotb.fork()` gives up control, but isn't a async function which needs an `await` in front of it.
* `cocotb.fork()` yields control "only a bit" to let exactly one other coroutine execute, but in a way which is rather unique.

> * And finally there are a couple other corner cases in error handling which are very hard or impossible to get right with `cocotb.fork()`, and which many of our users have painfully experienced over the years.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* And finally there are a couple of other corner cases in error handling which are very hard or impossible to get right with `cocotb.fork()`, and which many of our users have painfully experienced over the years.
```
?

> * And finally there are a couple other corner cases in error handling which are very hard or impossible to get right with `cocotb.fork()`, and which many of our have painfully experienced over the years.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* And finally there are a couple other corner cases in error handling which are very hard or impossible to get right with `cocotb.fork()`, and which many of our users have painfully experienced over the years.
```

> * And finally there are a couple other corner cases in error handling which are very hard or impossible to get right with `cocotb.fork()`, and which many of our have painfully experienced over the years.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* And finally there are a couple other corner cases in error handling which are very hard or impossible to get right with `cocotb.fork()`, and which many users have painfully experienced over the years.
```

**`cocotb.fork()` is deprecated, but it will remain available in cocotb 1.x.
We encourage you to migrate your testbenches to the new scheduling routines, most likely by simply replacing `cocotb.fork()` with `cocotb.start_soon()`.

> Have a look at [PR #2713](https://github.com/cocotb/cocotb/pull/2713/files) for how we did it the conversion in cocotb itself.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Have a look at [PR #2713](https://github.com/cocotb/cocotb/pull/2713/files) for how we did the conversion in cocotb itself.**
```

Right now, cocotb is [fairly relaxed about HDL datatypes](https://docs.cocotb.org/en/v1.6.0/writing_testbenches.html#reading-values-from-signals), and freely converts between them as needed mostly through its `BinaryValue` class (which is behind the `my_signal` assignment seen before).
However, being relaxed isn't always helpful, as some cocotb users have found out: conversions can go wrong, and expressiveness can be be lost.

Starting with cocotb 1.6, we're introducing datatypes which model common HDL data types: `Logic` for four-state logic values, `Bit` for two-state logic, `Array` and `LogicArray` for HDL-style arrays or vectors.
All these new types have been carefully designed to feel natural for both VHDL and SystemVerilog programmers, and to provide type safety and useful typecasts.

As of now these datatypes [can be used in custom testbench code](https://docs.cocotb.org/en/v1.6.0/library_reference.html#hdl-datatypes).
Going forward, we plan to bake these types more deeply into cocotb, and make signal handles return them.

## Assigning values to signals using `<=` is deprecated

One of the unique, but also slightly obscure, features of cocotb is on its way out:

> Setting values on handles using the `your_signal <= newval` syntax is now deprecated.
> Please use `your_signal.value = newval` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting values on handles using the `my_signal <= newval` syntax is now deprecated.
Please use `my_signal.value = newval` instead.
```
We use `my_signal`already a bit further up... unless this is meant jokingly?

Author: no pun intended, good catch!

We didn't take this decision lightly (it's more typing, after all!), but there are good reasons for it.

* First of all, the syntax doesn't always work (and there's no way of fixing it).
  Quiz: What do you think `a <= b if c else d` does?
  ([Answer](https://github.com/cocotb/cocotb/issues/2658))
* It's not obvious what `<=` does for someone who knows Python.
  We got asked many times, and every presentation introducing cocotb has to explain it.
  It's even hard to google for it!
* Finally, `<=` provides more than one way of doing things, which is bad for teaching and learning cocotb.

So if you have a spare moment, open the search-replace dialog of your favorite editor, and get rid of a couple `<=` assignments!

## GPI +- cocotb

Cocotb does a lot of hard work to provide a common interface between simulators and your Python testbench.
Within cocotb, this abstraction layer is called GPI.

> So how about a crazy idea: you want to write your own cocotb-like framework, but don't want to do the hard work of creating an abstracted interface to all those simulators out there?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So how about a crazy idea: you want to write your own cocotb-like framework in Python, but don't want to do the hard work of creating an abstracted interface to all those simulators out there?
```

Without the caveat some people might get excited and then let down :wink:

We are very thankful to Aldec for providing a license for Riviera-PRO, and to Siemens EDA for providing a license for Questa, which enables us to continuously test cocotb against these simulators to ensure they continue to be well integrated.

Please reach out to Philipp at [philipp@fossi-foundation.org](mailto:philipp@fossi-foundation.org) if you or your company want to support cocotb, either financially to help pay for costs such as running our continuous integration setup, or with in-kind donations, such as simulator licenses.

To close this rather long release announcement, here are some statistics:

    326 files changed, 9694 insertions(+), 14361 deletions(-)
    153 commits
    15 code contributors

These numbers are impressive and showcase the power of the free and open source collaboration model. To be able to sustain this amount of change and the high-quality review process behind it we are happy to have an active group of maintainers caring for cocotb and its users. Thank you, and thanks to the whole cocotb community for coming together to create this unique piece of software.

And now, go and enjoy the best release of cocotb so far!

> If you have questions or issues with this release head over to the [issue tracker](https://github.com/cocotb/cocotb/issues) with your question.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have questions or issues with this release head over to the [issue tracker](https://github.com/cocotb/cocotb/issues).
```
Redundant?
